---
layout: blogpost
title:  "GSoC 2017 Project: Integration of the OpenRISC Linux Port into OpTiMSoC"
date:   2017-09-04
categories: general
author: ppenna
---

Linux was ported to OpTiMSoC during the 2017's Google Sumer of Code. This blog
post details the work that was accomplished during the project; and as well the work
that was left to be tackled.

To port Linux to OpTiMSoC, a new manycore configuration with a Host Tile was designed and
implemented. The Host Tile runs OpenRISC Linux and communicates with
applications running on Computing Tiles via message-passing through the
Network-on-Chip (NoC). Overall, the communication infrastructure is exported to
user-level through standard UNIX file system operations, thereby enabling
user-level applications running on the Host Tile to rely on a high-level
communication abstractions. 

## I.

Figure 1 presents and the design overview of this project. A manycore
configuration featuring six tiles is depicted, one host tile and five compute
tiles. The host tile has a UART device attached to it and runs the OpenRISC
port of Linux; whereas compute tiles runs user-level applications bare metal.
Processes running on the Host Tile and user-level applications running on the
Compute Tile communicate with one another via message-passing.


Figure 1: Overview of the target manycore configuration.

The OpenRisc Linux kernel running on the Host Tile features a Network-on-Chip
(NoC) driver on which processes rely to send/receive messages. Operations on
this driver are exported to userland through the standard UNIX system calls for
manipulating files. Code Snippet 1 illustrates how a process running on the
Host Tile send messages based on this abstraction. As a side remark, note that
the user-level application should explicitly build the message header. In
future implementation, the idea is to have a user-level library that does this
job for the application. On the other hand, in Compute Tiles, user-level
applications rely on a baremetal message-passing library to carry out a
communication with other tiles.


## III. Building the Project

Since the Kernel source tree is not yet integrated into OpTiMSoC Project, this
blog post aims at providing enough information to someone on how to setup Linux
on OpTimSoC.

### Part 1: Setup OpTiMSoC

Follow the upstream online instructions at: https://www.optimsoc.org/docs/master/user_guide/installation.html

**In the end, set the ```OPTIMSOC``` environment variable to point to the
installation location of OpTiMSoC.**

### Part 2: Get Development Tools

To build Linux, you will need a slightly diferent toolchain than the one used to build OpTiMSoC. 

- Musl Toolchain
- Newlib Baremetal Toolchain

```
mkdir -p $HOME/toolchain

cd $HOME/toolchain

wget  https://github.com/openrisc/or1k-gcc/releases/download/or1k-5.4.0-20170218/or1k-elf-5.4.0-20170218.tar.bz2

tar -xjvf or1k-elf-5.4.0-20170218.tar.bz2

wget https://github.com/openrisc/or1k-gcc/releases/download/or1k-5.4.0-20170218/or1k-linux-musl-5.4.0-20170218.tar.bz2

tar -xjvf or1k-linux-musl-5.4.0-20170218.tar.bz2

wget https://github.com/openrisc/or1k-gcc/releases/download/or1k-5.4.0-20170218/or1k-linux-5.4.0-20170218.tar.bz2

tar -xjvf or1k-linux-5.4.0-20170218.tar.bz2
```

### Part 3: Build Unit Tests (Optional)

You can test your Linux build in OpTiMSoC with a simple distributed application:

- **hello-linux:** runs on a host tile on top of Linux and simply sends raw messages to a remote compute tile.
- **hello-baremetal**: runs on a compute tile on baremental, and simply read messages that arrive at the local NoC adapater and print them on the screen.

```
export LIBS=$OPTIMSOC/soc/sw/lib/baremetal/libbaremetal.a

git clone https://github.com/optimsoc/linux-apps $HOME/linux-apps

cd $HOME/linux-apps/

export CC=$HOME/toolchain/or1k-linux-musl/bin/or1k-linux-musl-gcc


$CC hello-linux/hello.c -o hello-linux/hello

export CC=$HOME/toolchain/or1k-elf/bin/or1k-elf-gcc
export CFLAGS=”-I $OPTIMSOC/soc/sw/include/baremetal/”

$CC $CFLAGS hello-baremetal/hello.c -o hello-baremetal/hello $LIBS    
```

### Part 4: Build Linux

Setup toolchain.

```
export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/toolchain/or1k-linux/bin/
export ARCH=openrisc
export CROSS_COMPILE=or1k-linux-
```

(Optional) If you have built unit tests from Step 3, you should copy ```hello-linux``` to the the initramfs directory.

```
mkdir -p $HOME/linux/arch/openrisc/initramfs/
    cp $HOME/linux-apps/hello-linux/hello $HOME/linux/arch/openrisc/initramfs/
```

Clone and build Linux. Note that this is done in three steps: (i) build system configuration; (ii) build dynamic modules; and (iii) build the kernel.

```
git clone https://github.com/optimsoc/linux.git $HOME/linux

cd $HOME/linux

make optimsoc_defconfig
make modules
make
```

